# AChangingSpectrum

My name is Manuel Nunez and I am a senior at the University of Florida at the time of writing this. This project is part of my senior thesis which aims to build different NLP models that are able to classify news articles within the political spectrum. 

In the United States it is acknowledged by most that each new outlet has a political bias extending in one direction or another. Five political leanings will be considered as part of the project: far left (1), center left (2), moderate (3), center right (4) and far right (5). It is worth noting that these categorys are ordinal in nature, which allows us to quantify political sentiment (2.5 is moderate left-leaning). Three news outlets pertaining to each of the five leanings will be explored (i.e. CNN, The Guardian, and ABC for center left). Each models built will have the same task of categorizing an article into its correct partition within the political spectrum where its corresponding news outlet is assigned. In other words, a CNN article should be classified as being center left as this is the category that pertains to the outlet and others similar to it. Articles written within the past five years will be used to train the models.  

Three models will be built. One model will use a "black-box" machine learning approach using neural networks and n-grams as inputs to find patterns of similarity between articles that correspond to the same political leaning. A second model will use a "rules-based" approach to find such similarities. For example, a TF-IDF or a cosine similarity metric may be used. A third model will blend the two aforementioned techniques and create a hybrid approach. 

The ultimate aim of the project, once all three models have been trained and evaluated (using accuracy, precision, F-1, etc.), is to make use of the most resilient model to track the progression of political sentiment over the course of the 21st century. For example, if a thousand CNN articles from 2005 are fed into the model (which is trained on data ranging from 2019-2023) and we find that the average categorization of these articles lands siginficantly to right on the spectrum (For example, with a score of 2.75), we will argue that CNN has been more left leaning in the past 5 years than it was in 2005.  
